docs: add pytorch lightning adapter docs [DET-4800] (#2076)
determined-ai/determined: docs/reference/api/lightning_adapter.txt

##############################
 determined.pytorch.lightning
##############################

.. _lightning-adapter:

***************************************************
 ``determined.pytorch.lightning.LightningAdapter``
***************************************************

Pytorch Lightning Adapter, defined here as ``LightningAdapter``,
provides a quick way to train your Pytorch Lightning models with all the

> Determined features, such as mid-epoch preemption, simple distributed

Reviewer: I might replace "simple distributed training interface" -> "easy distributed training"

training interface, simple job submission to the Determined cluster, and
so on.

LightningAdapter is built on top of our :ref:`PyTorchTrial
<pytorch-trial>` API, which has a built-in training loop that integrates
with the Determined features. However, it only supports `LightningModule
<https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common/lightning_module.html>`_
(v1.2.0). To migrate your code from the `Trainer
<https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common/trainer.html>`_,
please read more about :ref:`PyTorchTrial <pytorch-trial>` and
:ref:`experiment-configuration`.

Porting your ``PyTorchLightning`` code is often pretty simple: 1. Bring
in your ``LightningModule`` and ``LightningDataModule`` and initialize
them 2. Create a new trial based on ``LightningAdapter`` and initialize
it. 3. Define the dataloaders.

Here is an example:

.. code:: python

   from determined.pytorch import PyTorchTrialContext, DataLoader
   from determined.pytorch.lightning import LightningAdapter

>    # bring in your LightningModule and optinally LightningDataModule

Reviewer: Typo in optionally

           data_dir = f"/tmp/data-rank{context.distributed.get_rank()}"
           self.dm = MNISTDataModule(context.get_data_config()["url"], data_dir)

           # initialize LightningAdapter.
           super().__init__(context, lightning_module=lm)
           self.dm.prepare_data()

       def build_training_data_loader(self) -> DataLoader:
           self.dm.setup()
           dl = self.dm.train_dataloader()
           return DataLoader(
               dl.dataset, batch_size=dl.batch_size, num_workers=dl.num_workers
           )

       def build_validation_data_loader(self) -> DataLoader:
           self.dm.setup()
           dl = self.dm.val_dataloader()
           return DataLoader(
               dl.dataset, batch_size=dl.batch_size, num_workers=dl.num_workers
           )

.. autoclass:: determined.pytorch.lightning.LightningAdapter
   :members:
   :exclude-members: trial_controller_class, trial_context_class, evaluate_full_dataset, train_batch, evaluate_batch, setup_optimizers_schedulers
   :inherited-members:
   :member-order: bysource
   :special-members: __init__

In this approach, the ``LightningModule`` is not paired with the

> ``Trainer`` so that there are some methods and hooks that are not

Reviewer: I might disambiguate our Trainer with PTL trainer by replacing "paired with the ``Trainer``" -> "paired with a PyTorch Lightning ``Trainer``"

Author: 👍🏼 
Does "__the__ pytorch lightning trainer" sound good? There seems to be only one.

Reviewer: Yep, makes sense to me.

supported. Read about those here:

-  No separate test-set definition in Determined: ``test_step``,
   ``test_step_end``, ``test_epoch_end``, ``on_test_batch_start``,
   ``on_test_batch_end``, ``on_test_epoch_start``,
   ``on_test_epoch_end``, ``test_dataloader``.

-  No fit or pre-train stage: ``setup``, ``teardown``, ``on_fit_start``,
   ``on_fit_end``, ``on_pretrain_routine_start``,
   ``on_pretrain_routine_end``.

> -  And: ``training_step_end`` & ``validation_step_end``, ``hiddens``

Reviewer: Just to make it clear that these are also not supported, I might replace "And:" -> "Additionally, no"

   parameter in ``training_step`` and ``tbptt_split_batch``,
   ``transfer_batch_to_device``, ``get_progress_bar_dict``,
   ``on_train_epoch_end``, ``manual_backward``, ``backward``,
   ``optimizer_step``, ``optimizer_zero_grad``

In addition, we also patched some ``LightningModule`` methods to make
porting your code easier:

-  `log` and `log_dict` are patched to always log ship their values to
   Tensorboard. In the current version only the first two arguments in
   ``log``: ``key`` and ``value``, and the first argument in
   ``log_dict`` are supported.

.. note::

>    Make sure to return the metric you defined as `searcher.metric`` in

Reviewer: Is there a quote mismatch here?

.. _lightning-adapter:

*********************************************
 ``determined.pytorch._lightning.PLAdapter``
*********************************************

PyTorch Lightning Adapter, or PLAdapter for short, provides a quick way
to bring in your PyTorch Lightning project into Determined.

PLAdapter is built on top of our PyTorchTrial API and its training loop
providing the benefits that come with it such as mid-epoch preemtpion.
Read more about it here: :ref:`pytorch-trial`.

PLAdapter takes ``LightningModule`` from your Lightning code and
implements most of the methods you need from the PyTorchTrial API for
you. Since in this approach the LightningModule is not paired with the
standard trainer that comes with Lightning some methods and hooks are
not supported. Read about those here:

-  No separate test-set definition in Determined: ``test_step``,
   ``test_step_end``, ``test_epoch_end``, ``on_test_batch_start``,
   ``on_test_batch_end``, ``on_test_epoch_start``,
   ``on_test_epoch_end``, ``test_dataloader``.

-  No fit or pre-train stage: ``setup``, ``teardown``, ``on_fit_start``,
   ``on_fit_end``, ``on_pretrain_routine_start``,
   ``on_pretrain_routine_end``.

> -  Left for PyTorchTrial and upcoming PLTrial support:

Author: i'd probably move them to the table in that case.

   ``manual_backward``, ``backward``, ``optimizer_step``,
   ``optimizer_zero_grad``

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   -  -  Name
      -  Comment

   -  -  ``training_step_end`` & ``validation_step_end``
      -  No DP or DDP2 support

   -  -  ``hiddens`` argument in ``training_step`` &
         ``tbptt_split_batch``
      -  No Sequential model support in ``PyTorchTrial``

   -  -  ``transfer_batch_to_device``
      -

   -  -  ``get_progress_bar_dict``
      -  Provided through WebUI

   -  -  ``on_train_epoch_end``
      -  Incompatible with mid-epoch preemtpion

.. autoclass:: determined.pytorch._lightning.PLAdapter
   :members:

>    :exclude-members: trial_controller_class, trial_context_class, evaluate_full_dataset

Author: I added train and evaluate batch to excluded members list

>    :exclude-members: trial_controller_class, trial_context_class, evaluate_full_dataset

Author: leave the ones that they might want to optionally override? such as build_callbacks

>    :exclude-members: trial_controller_class, trial_context_class, evaluate_full_dataset

Reviewer 2: yes. that's fine

   :inherited-members:
   :member-order: bysource
   :special-members: __init__

Data Loading
============

> Loading your dataset when using the PLAdapter works the same way as it

Author: hmm it's in the same file 🤔  but  I guess it doesn't hurt

##############################

>  determined.pytorch.lightning

Reviewer 2: determined.pytorch

##############################

.. _lightning-adapter:

*********************************************

>  ``determined.pytorch._lightning.PLAdapter``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ``determined.pytorch.LightningAdapter``
```

Author: 👍🏼

*********************************************

Pytorch Lightning Adapter, or PLAdapter for short, provides a quick way
to train your Pytorch Lightning models with all the Determined features,
such as mid-epoch preemption, simple distributed training interface,
simple job submission to the Determined cluster, and so on.

PLAdapter is built on top of our :ref:`PyTorchTrial <pytorch-trial>`
API, which has a built-in training loop that integrates with the
Determined features. However, it only supports `LightningModule
<https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common/lightning_module.html>`_.
To migrate your code from the `Trainer
<https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common/trainer.html>`_,
please read more about :ref:`PyTorchTrial <pytorch-trial>` and
:ref:`experiment-configuration`.

> PLAdapter takes ``LightningModule`` from your Pytorch Lightning code and
> implements most of the methods you need from the :ref:`PyTorchTrial
> <pytorch-trial>` API for you. Since in this approach the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this approach, the
```

> PLAdapter takes ``LightningModule`` from your Pytorch Lightning code and
> implements most of the methods you need from the :ref:`PyTorchTrial
> <pytorch-trial>` API for you. Since in this approach the
> ``LightningModule`` is not paired with the standard trainer that comes
> with Pytorch Lightning some methods and hooks are not supported. Read
> about those here:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this approach, the ``LightningModule`` is not paired with the ``Trainer`` so that there are some methods and hooks that are not supported. Read about those here:
```

Author: I updated this but I didn't switch the whole paragraph just the last sentence. is that what you meant?
